Madison Burinsky

Over the past few weeks, people from all over the entire country have had to slow down and in some cases, even stop their daily routines in an effort to calm the spread of COVID-19. It is likely that the effects of people sheltering in their homes for this extended time will impact the current local and franchised businesses of College Park, Maryland, as well as ones that were planning on opening before the quarantine restrictions were put in place.

On May 3, 2019, the University of Maryland’s independent newspaper, The Diamondback, announced the return of the popular burger joint, Five Guys, to the College Park Shopping Center. Another article was published by the paper on Jan. 27 celebrating the return of the restaurant, yet neither story included the date of the planned opening.

The latter article seemed to qualify the lack of opening-day date by saying “Although the restaurant has yet to open, and its windows are still blocked off from view by brown sheet paper, seeing the sign stacked above the shop’s storefront has already generated excitement among some University of Maryland students.”

However, due to the new coronavirus, it appears as though the anticipation among the students of the university will simply have to wait for a less-infectious time.

Two Five Guys representatives who have knowledge of the opening of the new College Park restaurant did not return separate requests for comment.

As The Diamondback reported, the storefront sign that reads “Five Guys” in big block letters was adorned to the space it will be occupying, leading many to believe the opening day would be coming soon, when the story was published in January.

Of course, the word “soon” was different before the coronavirus swept the nation and created a new way of life for most Americans. Alone with the extremely contagious disease came the turbulent stock market, which has been threatening to hurl the economy into a downward spiral.

According to Investors.com, “The coronavirus stock market correction arrived in a flash with Wall Street's sudden realization that the Covid-19 outbreak would not be contained outside China.” The website also said that this market correction started on Feb. 25 and unleashed a series of never-before-seen lows of the market, which could be foreshadowing the potential upcoming dark days of the U.S. economy.

So how will this impending downturn of the economy affect the localities of College Park? Only time will tell, but it is important to note the amount of people employed by these industries that are at risk from an economic downfall. As people slowly lose their jobs, they stop spending money, and once they stop, then the businesses they frequent stop profiting, causing them to downsize on employees and adding to the total unemployment crisis.

According to Datausa.io, food preparation and serving related occupations contributed to 6.24% of total employment in College Park. That number could decrease if the quarantine and social distancing practices stay in place, since people cannot physically eat in their favorite restaurants.

Datausa.io also reported that the accommodation and food services industry itself employs 7.28% of the working population of College Park. Again, if social distancing and quarantine mandates remain in place for several more weeks, the accommodation and food services industry could lose a major portion of its clientele who will be stuck at home, and that may cause them to have more layoffs, which will increase the unemployment rate.

 Forbes.com dubs it the “fastest-growing restaurant chain in the U.S.,” but the question of how the new Five Guys location in College Park will react to the sudden switch of the economy amidst its grand opening is still at large.

The ability of College Park and the nation to adapt to the new-normal chaotic climate of today’s world will be the true test for the success of any business, old or new.
